[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Misunderstood right effort
is a driven "I've got to change"
in which you get trapped
in trying, and yet,
no effort is not harmonious
with the yearning for freedom
and the feeling of the desire
to do the work on oneself.
So one is cultivating
and moving in and out
at first sequentially and
then, hopefully, more and more
simultaneously.
That statement, "The
wise person does nothing,
and nothing is
left undone," it's
that learning how to be between
effort and no effort that
is such a delicate art
form, in which there
are things being done, there
is effort made to change.
I'm with somebody,
and I feel myself
get caught in some habits of
interaction that are stuffy,
they're real.
Now, under certain conditions
I'd say to the person,
let's work this out,
let's get behind it.
If the timing is
wrong when I do that,
we are so invested
in those patterns
that even as we
try to work it out,
we just keep substituting other
patterns and keep working.
There is another timing where
it is so ripe that we can just,
recognizing the
caughtness, we start
to let go because we're
both ready to let go.
Right effort has to do with
timing and hearing as well
and feeling when that effort
is just absolutely appropriate,
and you're not going to get
caught in making the effort.
It's just what needs to happen.
I had been on a long
tour, a lecture tour,
and I was very tired.
And I was in New
Mexico, and I was
in a sauna with some lovely
friends, a Tibetan nun,
and others.
And a telegram was
delivered to me.
And the telegram said, we
are holding a place for you
for the Rohatsu Dai-Sesshin,
which starts on December 19.
This was December 17.
Now, the Rohatsu
Dai-Sesshin is the sitting
in that sect of Zen
Buddhism that is
the fiercest one of the year.
Here, I was relaxing
in this hot tub.
It was all so sweet.
And here, they were these cold,
tight zen Buddhists 1,000 miles
away, holding a space for me.
And I read the telegram,
and I felt my way
into this moment, the sauna, the
nun, the telegram, Mount Baldy,
the airplane, the rushing,
and the opportunity
to have nine or 11 days of
such incredible discipline
and rigor.
And I found in me this
incredible yearning
for that experience.
And I said to
everybody, excuse me.
I've just been called away.
I went into it, and it was hard.
It was really hard
because you got
to keep going in to the Roshi.
And his technique is--
they give you a koan, you see.
My koan was "How do
you know your Buddha
nature through the
sound of a pine tree?"
So then you go in
and you report.
And you've been practicing what
you're going to say to him.
So you say something
like "listening."
And he rings the bell,
and you're thrown out.
"Oh, my God."
And this went on for five days.
Five days, and four times
a day, you got to do this.
And he was just
cutting me to shreds.
Finally, on the fifth day,
I was running a fever,
and I had chills, and I got so
disgusted with the whole thing.
I ran up, and I looked at
a bush, and it was burning,
and I thought a-ha.
He got all finished
with his routine,
and I said, "Good
morning, Roshi."
(MIMICKING ROSHI IN
JAPANESE ACCENT) "Now, you
becoming beginning
student of Zen."
But it was interesting
that moment
in the sauna where the pleasure
was beautiful and lovely,
but that yearning for
something was so strong that I
would put myself in that
situation, knowing I
was going into that.
And you'd say,
well, was it effort?
It was and it wasn't.
It was the obvious.
It was like is falling
off a log effort?
Well, it isn't when
your balance is right.
And it all has to do
with timing and balance,
the way I can hear it, to get
that quality of right effort.
[MUSIC PLAYING]